Honduras introduction
Honduras has been a transit point for
narcotics coming to the United States
since the late 1970s it's relatively
sparse population large number of remote
dirt air strips long coastline and
unpolluted an attractive stopover point
halfway between Colombia and the United
States Colombian marijuana smugglers
have used Honduran waters to transfer
loads from mother ships to smaller boats
headed for the United States Colombian
cocaine traffickers have used hunter and
air strips for refueling and
transshipment of cocaine heading north
in addition to large recent cocaine
seizures demonstrate that Honduras is
being used to repackage narcotics to
avoid detection as the drugs come across
the US border in 1987 customs officials
seized 2268 kilograms of cocaine in a
shipment of Honduran plantains and 3629
kilos in a shipment of Honduran
furniture there is evidence that
individuals in the Honduran military
which controls the police have protected
the cocaine trade the military has
dominated the elected civilian
government since democracy was
presumably restored in 1981 the Honduran
military has consistently supported US
policies in Central America most notably
the Contra war Honduras has received
large amounts of US assistance in 1986
Honduras was the eighth largest
recipient of US foreign assistance
receiving 189 million dollars in loans
and grants the peak year for USA
201-209-1810 very military leadership
became involved with gun running and
smuggling through their relationship
with men colonel Noriega
according to Jose blendin Colonel
Noriega
used his relationship with military
intelligence counterparts throughout
Central America to protect his arms
dealings and his entry into the drug
trade his counterpart in Honduras the
head of the Honduran military
intelligence in the late 1970's and
early 80's was colonel taurus arias jose
Blandon testified that Noriega
drew Torres arias and a close associate
of his Colonel Bowden the commander of
an Armored Division into the business of
supplying weapons to the FMLN rebels in
El Salvador several weapons flights from
Noriega to the FMLN in Salvador went
through Honduran territory and were
protected by Torosaurus and Bowden when
blendin was asked whether he personally
knew that weapons were being shipped
through honduras to the rebels in El
Salvador
he responded of course he went on to
testify quote Noriega coordinated
meetings in Panama with the Directorate
of the fara bundo Marti front to
establish two routes for the supply of
arms to El Salvador one through the Gulf
of Fonseca and another in the north of
Honduras called the Ho Chi Minh Trail
did you attend any of those meetings
answer I attended both meetings and
quote in 1983 Noriega arranged two
meetings between torus arias Bowden and
the FMLN rebels Noriega wanted to have
Fidel Castro introduced Torosaurus and
Bowden to the FMLN leadership in order
to facilitate the development of a
direct relationship to conceal Havana as
their real destination torus arias and
Bowden said they were traveling to visit
Noriega in Panama
they went to Panama but were then flown
to Havana in a Panamanian military jet
for secret meetings with Castro and the
FMLN when the word of the trips to
Havana began to circulate among the
Honduran military leadership Noriega
passed the details back to the CIA
news of the trips caused a scandal which
led to the dismissal of both Taurus
arias and Bowden from the Honduran
military Landon testified that by 1981
the relationship between Noriega and
Taurus arias had expanded into narcotics
trafficking land owned also testified
that he had indications that the network
of clandestine air strips in Honduras
which was being used to supply the
Honduran based Contras were being used
by drug planes Honduran coastal waters
also have been used to transfer
marijuana from mother ships to smaller
shrimp boats for runs to the United
States convicted smuggler Lea rich
testified that he had cargoes of
marijuana transferred from Colombian
mother ships to their shrimp boats and
Honduran waters rich testified that the
shrimp boat they used looked exactly
like the ones the Hondurans used and
blend it in with the Honduran fleet the
Colombian mother ships offloaded the
marijuana to the shrimp boats at night
and the shrimp boats would then head
back to the United States convicted
trafficker Michael Vogel testified that
his smuggling group was offered the same
offloading use of Honduran waters while
Vogel testified that he never personally
used Honduras he was aware of a group
working out of Honduras in conjunction
with the Honduran military riches and
Vogel's account of using Honduran waters
for the trans shipment of marijuana was
confirmed by Tomas Zepeda the agent who
opened the first DEA office in Honduras
in 1981 Zapata in a subcommittee
deposition stated that Honduran waters
were being used for trench shipment to a
considerable degree he went on to say
that such trans shipments were protected
by the military when the DEA would ask
the Honduran Navy to intercept the
smugglers boats Zapata said they
underand naval officers would quote
stall for time identifying a number of
problems
lack of fuel
boat would be unable to operate and
frequently I would have to go into
headquarters and request authorization
to buy fuel for the patrol boats so we
could go out on an operation it was
usually after the fact when we got out
in the patrol area and quote Zepeda also
said that he had received information
that taurus aureus was involved in the
drug trade and that he had passed the
information on to washington according
to the Zepeda
when taurus aureus was replaced by
General Gustavo Alvarez the corruption
at senior levels of the armed forces
continued Zepeda said that he filed
extensive reports on the corruption of
the military by the drug traffickers and
that the corruption made his work in
Honduras difficult quote it was
difficult to conduct an investigation
and expect the Honduran authorities to
assist in arrests when it was them we
were trying to investigate end quote
he explained without consulting Zepeda
the DEA office in Honduras was closed in
June of 1983 for budgetary reasons
Zepeda said that if he had been asked he
would have argued that the office should
have stayed in operation he said that
even though there had not been many
arrests the office had generated a
substantial amount of useful
intelligence when the office closed
Zapata was sent to the Guatemala City
DEA office where he continued to spend
seventy percent of his time dealing with
the Honduran drug problem Zepeda
testified that the drug problem in
Guatemala was less severe than the one
in Honduras boy so Rosa 'glitch in Ian
and narco-terrorism on October 28 1984
the FBI seized a shipment of 345 kilos
of cocaine worth an estimated 40 million
dollars on a rural era in South Florida
the proceeds from the sale of cocaine
were to have been used to finance a plot
to assassinate Honduran president
Roberto's suazo
Cordoba
arrested in the plot or general Jose boy
so Rosa who was at the time the Honduran
military attache in Santiago Chile
Gerard latch in Ian a Honduran arms
dealer living in Miami and phii's say
kaafi a Honduran businessman also living
in Miami all were charged with
conspiracy to commit murder at the time
of the arrests
FBI director William Webster stated
quote we don't want international
terrorists to establish beachheads or
bases for operations in the United
States such as they have enjoyed for
years in other parts of the world end
quote
factual admissions by the United States
in the trial of Oliver North released
publicly on April 6th 1989 revealed that
quote in mid-september 1986
Lieutenant Colonel north advised Admiral
Poindexter that US ambassador Negroponte
general Gorman of SOUTHCOM senior CIA
official Duane Clarridge and Lieutenant
Colonel North had worked out
arrangements for support of the contra
resistance with general Boyce Oh Rosa a
former Honduran military officer who had
recently been convicted of offenses in
the u.s. lieutenant colonel north
suggested that efforts be made on boy so
Rosa's behalf to deter him from
disclosing details of these covert
activities boy so Rosa was subsequently
extradited from Chile to the United
States well let chin ian was convicted
by a federal jury on conspiracy charges
and sentenced to 30 years in prison boy
so Rosa was treated very lenient Lee he
was sentenced to five years at Eglin Air
Force Base federal prison camp in
Florida after a senior US government
officials attempted to intercede on his
behalf
since quote he had been a friend to the
u.s. involved in helping us with the
Contras end quote the Justice Department
had objected strenuously to the lenient
treatment accorded boy so Rosa arguing
that the conspiracy was the quote
most significant case of narco-terrorism
yet discovered end quote
on november 21st 1987 jorge Ojo was
arrested on a highway in colombia
driving a $70,000 porsche owned by saeed
spear a Honduran colonel
serving as a military attache in Bogota
Syed spear denied knowing a Choi and
said that his use of the car was
unauthorized but he could not explain
how he was able to purchase such an
expensive car on the pay of a Honduran
Colonel on November 19 1987 a week after
authorities in Florida confiscated the
largest seizure of drugs ever in the
United States 8,000 pounds of cocaine
which had been packed in hollow
furniture in a Honduran factory DEA
announced plans to reopen its Honduran
office ramn matta-ballesteros in March
1985 DEA agent Enrique Camarena was
kidnapped and brutally murdered in
Mexico Canada Reyna had been
investigating the activities of ramn
matta-ballesteros and Miguel flix
Gallardo at the time of his kidnapping
both biased Eros and Guyardo were
believed to have been partners in a
large cocaine smuggling organization
which worked through Mexico to the
United States following Camarena's
murder
DEA began an intensive search for mata
mata was born in Honduras and grew up in
an environment of extreme poverty and
illiteracy as a young man he obtained a
false visa and moved to the United
States he was eventually captured by
immigration officials and deported he
returned to the United States where he
was sentenced to five years at a minimum
security prison in Florida after serving
3 and 1/2 years of his sentence he
bribed his way out of prison and fled to
Mexico where he joined a drug smuggling
ring he rose through the ranks to become
one of the top people in the smuggling
organization
the time DEA agent Camarena began his
inquiry de eighth-ranked monta to
Cartagena Colombia where he was arrested
and set for extradition the Medellin
Cartel planned an escape from the lapa
Cota prison in Bogota but the warden
Alcides arimin D blocked their plans in
revenge
the cartel murdered era Mende while his
car was stalled in Bogota traffic the
cartels second attempt at rescuing Mata
was successful they paid two million
dollars in bribes to the prison guards
and Mata walked out of jail and flew to
Tegucigalpa once back in Honduras he
surrendered to authorities on
outstanding murder charges he was
subsequently found innocent and resumed
a normal life he believed that he was
safe from extradition to the United
States because the Honduran Constitution
forbids the extradition of Honduran
nationals Mata who had been
characterized by u.s. customs officials
as a class-one
DEA violator quickly became one of
Tegucigalpa leading citizens he helped
establish an airline company set Co
which among other services provided
cargo transport services for Contras
based in Honduras he took up residence
on a large estate and began giving money
to the poor at the same time US law
enforcement officials believed that he
began running his cocaine smuggling
operation from Tegucigalpa their
suspicions about his activities
increased as the result of two large
seizures of cocaine from Honduras in
South Florida the seizures which totaled
more than 5,000 kilos were both
concealed in containers shipped from
Honduras to the United States in
addition convicted smuggler Michael
Vogel stated that in the course of his
drug trafficking and looking into the
possibility of trafficking through
Honduras he was informed that an
individual named Mata was the cartels
point man in Honduras specifically and
Central America generally and that to
engage in any narcotics activity in
Honduras one had to have his cooperation
despite his connection to the Camarena
murder and his widely suspected drug
dealing the United States did not
pressure the Honduran government to take
steps to expel him from the country or
curb his activities until April 1988 on
April 5th 1988 the military arrested him
and expelled him from the country by
putting him on a plane to the Dominican
Republic upon arrival in the Dominican
Republic he was put on a plane to Miami
with American authorities who arrested
him as soon as the plane was in American
airspace the arrest occurred on the eve
of Zapatas scheduled testimony before
the subcommittee Rigoberto Rogalla de
lara on may 16th 1988 the Honduran
ambassador to Panama was ordered held
without bond in Miami after US customs
agents found nearly 26 pounds of cocaine
in his luggage
the ambassador Rigoberto Rogalla de lara
a retired Honduran Army colonel and
step-brother of the Honduran Armed
Forces commander-in-chief had been
ambassador to Panama since 1986 in
response to the arrest the Honduran
government notified US authorities that
regalado's diplomatic immunity had been
suspended
allowing Regalado to be prosecuted under
the laws of the United States Regalado
had arrived at Miami International
Airport from Tegucigalpa on a tan
Airlines flight on may 15th a customs
inspector checking his luggage found the
cocaine inside 10 packages surrounded by
coffee and wrapped in plastic concealed
inside pant legs and other clothing in
his suitcase policy
choose a review of the history of gun
running and drug trafficking through
honduras suggests that elements of the
Honduran military were involved in the
shipment of weapons to the FMLN in El
Salvador and in the protection of drug
traffickers from 1980 on these
activities were reported to appropriate
US government officials throughout the
period instead of moving decisively to
close down the drug trafficking by
stepping up the DEA presence in the
country and using the foreign assistance
the United States was extending to the
Hondurans as a lever the United States
closed the DEA office in Tegucigalpa and
appears to have ignored the issue little
public attention was focused on the
presence of Mota biased eros in the
country until the February 1988 New York
Times article moreover as previously
noted when a former Honduran military
officer who has assisted the United
States in the Contra war against
Nicaragua became involved in a narco
terrorist plot to kill the elected
president of Honduras high officials of
the US government interceded in an
effort to get his sentence reduced
denying weapons to the FMLN was a major
US policy objective in the early 1980s
it was so important that it became a
central issue in United States
Nicaraguan relations and became a
justification for various u.s. supported
actions against the Sandinistas as in
the case of Panama it appears that a
compelling factor in United States
Honduran relations was support for
American policy in the region especially
support for the Contra war as long as
the Honduran government provided that
support the other issues were of
secondary importance
[Music]
this is our hidden history